---
layout: post
title:  "Lincoln’s Legacy"
date:   2021-04-16 06:00:46 +0000
categories:
---

The 15th April is the day Abraham Lincoln died. I guess more or less everyone is drawn to him at some point. Unlike in most cases I’m not the least put off by the hagiographies and the unctuous praise that people continue to heap on him - I’m all in on the greatness of the man. I’m the sort of person that reads Team of Rivals totally uncritically, and I have a lot of time for sentimental and tendentious explanations of his almost complete genius - I find it comforting. I’m aware that people find his mania for colonisation as a solution to the problem of slavery troubling, I do too - but he did come around pretty emphatically. By the end of the war he was talking about suffrage for African-American veterans. But while it’s deeply unfashionable to insist that we understand people’s words and actions through the lens of the political atmosphere of the time, I think it’s probably the correct approach anyway. The white abolitionists were right about almost everything to do with slavery but many of them were for bad reasons - how applicable is John Brown’s righteous fury approach to any other big problem? (But then maybe slavery is such an obvious and historically unique crime that John Brown was just right). 

I think what I’m getting at is that I like the way Lincoln thought about things, that he was self-questioning - many white abolitionists strike me as being right about one very big thing but in a largely dogmatic and thoughtless way that isn’t helpful for solving other problems. This is probably an unfair summary of the behaviour and views of white abolitionists - I should learn more about them. 

I don’t think there is anything inherently wrong with being radical about things. And as Ta-Nehisi Coates puts it, ‘If you were black during the Civil War and favored freedom--as most black people did, and most humans in the same situation would--you were a "radical." You had no choice in the matter.’ What I’m suspicious of is radicalism or progressivism as inherently good - that makes no sense to me at all. Some things are already good and changing them a lot for the sake of it is dumb. This is essentially the same criticism I have for the Chesterton’s fence people - the fence might be there for a good reason, but it might be there for a bad reason too. These truths are totally independent of your intuitions about how to conduct politics - there are right and wrong answers, not right or wrong ‘tendencies’. 

But the worst misconception of Lincoln is that he was the ultimate compromiser - he was very clearly nothing of the sort. He took his time getting somewhere, but once committed, stayed committed. I like that. I also think that the people who consider compromise the highest value in politics couldn’t be more wrong if they tried - in most cases one side is right and one side is wrong. A great clarifier of the last few years of bananas British politics has been the realisation that the Centrist Dad tendency is without question the most contemptible. With compromise everyone can hide behind the excuse that their idea was not properly implemented. It stinks.  